Welcome to the world of electricity markets! I'm Keegan Trujillo-Green and we're going to learn about ➡️ wholesale electricity markets and how they work.

<!-- # Introduction to Wholesale Electricity Markets -->

<!-- ## The Electrical Grid -->

The world's ➡️ electrical grids stand alongside the internet and water supply networks ➡️ as great systems and accomplishments of humanity. We rely on these systems every day, yet most of us don't understand how these complex systems work. ➡️ We often take these systems for granted when they are functioning correctly, which they almost always are. When such systems fail, ➡️ such as during a power outage, we realize how dramatically they improve our quality of life.

The ability to flip a switch and flood a room with light in the middle of the night is the result of over a hundred years of human innovation and people working around the clock to keep the world's grids running smoothly&mdash;to literally keep the lights on. ➡️ What happens every time we turn on an appliance often eludes us. But without fail, slightly more current gets drawn through tens or hundreds of kilometers of transmission and distribution lines. And, in tandem, the generators at the end of those transmission lines start to work slightly harder, whether in a power station or a solar or wind farm.

But even this isn't a full appreciation for what goes into constantly balancing the supply and demand of electricity. The grid is just as much an economic system as a physical one, and it can be operated in a way that creates the ideal economic playing field&mdash;one that incentivizes the generation of power that is plentiful, reliable, and affordable. That playing field is the electricity market. Before we discuss the **wholesale electricity market**, which will be the focus of this presentation, let's look at a brief history of the grid. ➡️

<!-- ## A Brief History of the Electrical Grid -->

➡️ The electric power industry was pioneered in the US and UK in the late 1800s and early 1900s. Before electrical grids were established, the ➡️ supply and demand of electricity had to be co-located. This was inconvenient and inefficient, ➡️ so private utility companies came about to operate their own generation and distribution systems serving multiple customers. In some cases, ➡️ utility companies connected their respective systems to be able to work together to meet peaks in demand. It was quickly realized that electricity systems serve the public good, and government oversight resulted in a new world order for utility companies. By around 1940 in the UK and France, ➡️ nationalization resulted in the interconnection of regional grids into nationwide grids. And ➡️ by 1960, many European countries had nationwide grids of one form or another.

Whether owned by a private company or government organization, and whether the size of a region or of a country, electrical grids must be operated such that the supply of electricity equals the demand for electricity at all times. Otherwise, as we'll learn, load shedding, brownouts, or blackouts occur. Balancing supply and demand is where the wholesale electricity market comes into play. ➡️

<!-- ## Wholesale Electricity Markets -->

A wholesale electricity market, also known as a power exchange (PX), is a system that allows ➡️ balancing supply and demand while ➡️ minimizing the cost of electricity production (supply) and maximizing value to electricity consumers (demand). In a wholesale electricity market, ➡️➡️ loads participate by *bidding* to buy power, and ➡️ generators participate by *offering* to sell power. A generator may be a power station (e.g., a hydroelectric power station) or a wind or solar farm. A load may be a utility company (participating in the market on behalf of its customers) or, more recently, large industrial consumers. ➡️

A central authority decides which bids and offers to accept/dispatch, and which to reject. Making this decision is called *clearing the market* ➡️➡️, the objective ➡️ of which is to achieve the best overall outcome for the generators and loads. Because of this objective, the market clearing process has some key requirements. ➡️ Firstly, the decision must be informed by knowledge of the transmission and distribution networks, of all generators and their offers, and of all loads and their bids. The central authority must know the limits of the grid's transmission lines, otherwise they might try to transmit too much power through certain transmission lines, rather than generating locally when necessary. The second ➡️ key requirement of the market clearing process is that it must be done for all generators and loads simultaneously, as part of one decision, as there is generally only one outcome that maximizes benefit to all generators and loads.

The only way these requirements can be met is if the decision is made by a ➡️ central authority, rather than by any one generation company or utility. The central authority is typically responsible not only for clearing the market, but for operating the market in general. The central authority is usually a government-owned or government-appointed not-for-profit organization, but sometimes, especially historically and in the US, it is a privately owned and for-profit company. However, the central authority being a ➡️ government organization&mdash;one that does not itself own (or have stakes in) any generators or loads&mdash;ensures that the operation of the market is unbiased. Because such an organization cannot itself earn revenue from generating electricity, it operates for the public good, not for profit. Thus, generators are paid fairly, loads are charged fairly, and both are selected for dispatch fairly. In North America, such organizations are called ➡️ Independent System Operators (ISOs) because they don't own any&mdash;that is, they are independent of&mdash;generators, loads, and transmission lines. Examples include the California ISO (CAISO) and Ontario's Independent Electricity System Operator (IESO). ➡️

The ➡️ wholesale electricity market is concerned with the ➡️ day-to-day and ➡️ real-time operation of the grid. Though not the topic of this presentation, there is typically also a ➡️ *capacity market* which is responsible for incentivizing the long-term planning and construction of generation capacity, or, as I like to call it, "generation for generations". ➡️

<!-- ## Open Versus Closed Markets -->

We previously discussed private companies versus government organizations as the central authority for operating a wholesale electricity market. We discussed that, in the case of a government organization, ➡️ it should not have stakes in any generators or utility companies. However, this says nothing of whether ➡️ generators or utility companies should themselves be private or government-owned. In fact, as part of ➡️ energy liberalization trends occurring at the turn of the millennium, many ➡️ governments around the world opened their electricity markets to allow more private generation companies to participate, rather than just government-owned or government-contracted ones. This ➡️ attempted to reduce electricity prices by increasing competition. Such energy liberalization efforts are thus also known as ➡️ *privatization* or market *deregulation*, although the latter term can be misleading as it may be taken to mean that government regulations surrounding electricity market operations were relaxed, which is ➡️ certainly not the case. Energy liberalization often came with ➡️ restructuring of the government organizations responsible for the grid. For example, the IESO, like many ISOs, was founded in the late 1990s, but that does not mean that Ontario did not have an electricity market before then, merely that it was closed off to participants that were not government-owned or government-contracted, and thus less competitive.

Now that we have some history and context, let's learn how the supply and demand of electricity works in the market. ➡️

<!-- # The Supply and Demand of Electricity -->

➡️ To understand the wholesale electricity market, one must understand the economic principles of supply and demand. To do so, let's start with a market example that is unrelated to the electricity market, but familiar and intuitive.

<!-- ## Introduction to Economics: Your Friendly Neighborhood Espresso Market -->

So, imagine a ➡️ neighborhood of cafés, all serving espresso. What a wondrous place to live! The baristas make as many espresso shots as customers buy. More specifically, at any given time, the ➡️ rate at which baristas supply espresso shots (e.g., in shots per hour) is always equal to the rate at which customers demand them.

For reasons that will become apparent later, we will ➡️ assume for the sake of example that all cafés serve identical espresso and offer an identical experience to customers. Because the cafés' offerings are the same and they are conveniently located within the same neighborhood, the only thing that would set them apart in the eyes of customers is their prices.

But if a ➡️ café tries to undercut its neighbors, the other cafés will follow suit if the lower price is sustainable in order to stay competitive. And if a ➡️ café raises its price to increase its profit margin, others will be able to do the same. ➡️ For a given time, place, and offering, there is one stable price. Different cafés may have different operating costs&mdash;perhaps a café has a more expensive supplier of espresso beans&mdash;but they tend to charge the same price per espresso shot and pocket the difference.

➡️➡️➡️ Customers' demand for espresso shots is based on how much the cafés charge for each one; there will be ➡️ fewer customers if the cafés charge more and vice versa. Thus, the rate at which customers buy espresso is a function of the price per espresso shot. This function is called the ➡️ demand curve, which models buyer behavior in aggregate and is generally monotonically decreasing. The demand curve changes with time; for example, demand for espresso is greatest in the morning.

Now we look at the ➡️ supply side. If the cafés have to make ➡️ more espresso, they will have to purchase more espresso beans. They will have to call upon additional baristas to help, or have to pay each barista more per hour&mdash;more per shot, essentially. In other words, the cafés have a cost per espresso shot, which is reflected in the price they charge for each one. However, the cafés' price per shot is not constant. If the cafés are ➡️ overwhelmed with customers, they may charge more for each espresso shot to take advantage of the situation and make more profit per shot. The cafés may have to augment their baristas' hourly wages with bonus pay to keep them happy. To meet the demand, the cafés may also have to bust out their older, less efficient espresso machines from their back rooms that use more espresso beans per shot. On the other hand, if the cafés are having a slow day, they may reduce their price and sacrifice some profit per espresso shot to make the most of the low demand. This is called dynamic pricing. The ➡️ price is a function of the rate at which espresso shots are being sold. This price is also known as the *marginal cost* of supplying an additional espresso shot (per hour). The price function is called the ➡️ supply curve, which models seller behavior in aggregate and is generally monotonically increasing.

A given café is willing to sell espresso at or above a certain price, and a given customer is willing to buy at or below a certain price. ➡️

<!-- ## The Market Clearing Process -->

The discussed principles are true not just for a neighborhood of cafés but for any capitalist market. These basic tenets of economics are the principles of supply and demand. They apply wherever ➡️ a quantity $Q$ of a particular good is exchanged at a price $P$. $Q$ is measured in goods per hour, and $P$ is measured in dollars (or any other currency) per good.

The allocation of buyers to sellers (customers to cafés) is a process called *clearing the market*. ➡️ This determines the quantity of goods that gets exchanged in the market, $Q^*$, and at what price, $P^*$. This price is known as the *market price* or *market-clearing price*. ➡️➡️ Sellers who charge a low price are able to produce at a low cost and don't price-gouge. A capitalist market rewards such sellers, giving them priority over other, less efficient ones. At the same time, a capitalist market rewards ➡️ buyers who are willing to pay a high price, giving them priority over other buyers who don't value the product as much. It follows that we can model the ➡️ market clearing process by ➡️ allocating an increasing quantity of goods to the buyers and sellers, starting with the buyers who are willing to pay the most and the sellers who are willing to charge the least, until the ➡️ buying price equals the selling price. ➡️

We can represent this model graphically (or mathematically) by plotting the supply and demand curves as shown. The market-clearing price ➡️ $P^*$ and quantity $Q^*$ are dictated by the point where the two curves intersect. The ➡️ area under the supply curve until a quantity $Q$ represents the cost $C$ of producing that quantity (not to be confused with the marginal cost of producing an additional unit of that quantity). The ➡️ area under the demand curve until a quantity $Q$ represents the cumulative value delivered to buyers by that quantity, known in economics as *utility*, $U\!$. Subject to the ➡️ constraint that the quantity sold must be the same as the quantity bought, $Q^*$ simultaneously ➡️ maximizes buyer utility and minimizes seller cost. The difference $U - C$ is known in economics as *surplus* or *welfare*, $W\!$. In clearing the market, welfare is maximized.

Welfare can be split into two parts: ➡️ producer surplus, and consumer surplus. Producer surplus is the area above the supply curve but below $P^*$, representing the profit earned by selling above the cost of production. Consumer surplus is the area below the demand curve but above $P^*$, representing the extra value delivered to customers beyond what they paid for.

Obviously there is no regulatory body that allocates customers to cafés, no economist planted in town square finding the intersection between the supply and demand curves. Your friendly neighborhood espresso market clears itself. Cafés try to charge the highest price that the optimal number of customers are willing to pay, and customers naturally seek out the lowest price that cafés are willing to charge; the two sides generally meet somewhere in the middle. ➡️

<!-- ## Clearing the Wholesale Electricity Market -->

The principles of supply and demand are so universal that they apply to the electrical grid when operated as an electricity market. In this case, the ➡️ good is not espresso shots but megawatt-hours of electricity&mdash;energy for machines, rather than for humans. The ➡️ unit of measurement is not espresso shots per hour but megawatt-hours per hour&mdash;so, just megawatts (MW). In a wholesale electricity market, the rate at which electricity is supplied (the production, or generation) is always equal to the rate at which it is demanded (the consumption, or load). In the café analogy, ➡️ generators are espresso machines, and ➡️ loads&mdash;such as your local utility company&mdash;are customers. Everything that we've discussed so far in terms of cafés (and capitalist markets in general) applies to the wholesale electricity market. ➡️

We assumed before that all cafés served identical espresso. In other words, we assumed that espresso is a ➡️➡️ *commodity*&mdash;a good that varies little between sellers and that buyers are not picky about. Obviously this isn't true about espresso in the real world! Examples of commodities include ➡️ wheat, ➡️ crude oil, and... ➡️ electricity! Indeed, all electrons are created equal. Electricity may be produced from a variety of energy sources (➡️ nuclear, ➡️ hydro, and ➡️ so on) and travel varying distances to get to your home, but there is no differentiating between a nuclear-generated electron and a hydro-generated electron. People care about the origin and locality of their food more than that of their electricity. Yes, some people care about the environmental sustainability of their electricity&mdash;I among them&mdash;but we cannot choose between sustainable and unsustainable electrons. We can only choose to consume electricity at times of day when there is a higher proportion of sustainable electrons in the mix. But, at a given time, all electrons are equal. ➡️

Previously we discussed the market clearing process. The wholesale electricity market must be cleared like any other, but unlike a neighborhood espresso market, it cannot feasibly clear itself. There are two reasons for this.

First of all, there is no ➡️ buffer between production and consumption. Let's look at this through the lens of the café analogy. If cafés are busy, customers can feasibly wait for up to several minutes between placing their orders and receiving their espresso. Alternately, the cafés can prepare extra espresso shots while morning demand is still ramping up, to reduce customer wait times. But this does not work in the electricity market. When you turn on your kettle, you don't have to wait even a second for power. You just take. The grid cannot ramp up in advance of everyone turning on their kettles in the morning because, traditionally, there is no way to store that extra power.

The second reason for which the electricity market cannot clear itself is that ➡️ resources are pooled. When you want espresso, you go to one café and talk to one barista who fulfills your order. But when you want to turn on your electric kettle at home, you don't call up a generator and ask them to ramp up by a couple kilowatts. There is a disconnect between the demand (you, or rather, your utility company) and the supply (the generators).

Thus, the wholesale electricity market must be administered by a regulatory body&mdash;the ➡️ system operator&mdash;that ➡️ monitors the demand, and ➡️ tells each generator how much to supply such that the total supply exactly equals the demand at all times. It is worth it to have an ➡️ ISO or similar organization different to whoever owns and operates the generators because it ➡️ fosters healthy competition between the generation companies, which ➡️ reduces the cost of electricity. ➡️

It is worth re-iterating that everything involved in the market clearing process is time-variant: ➡️ supply curves, demand curves, quantities, and prices. ➡️ Fluctuations and spikes occur in electricity prices when the demand, and thus the supply, fluctuate and spike. ➡️ Frequent and large price changes are very characteristic of electricity markets and seldom observed elsewhere. I mean, when's the last time you saw espresso prices changing by a factor of 100 within a day? ➡️

Another difference between the electricity market and other markets is the disconnect between end customers and the market prices. When you purchase espresso (or any other good), you are aware of the price at the time of purchase. However, residential and commercial grid users (and thus the utility companies through whom they purchase electricity) decide how much electricity to consume based on a crude approximation of the real-time price, such as fixed electricity rates that are higher during the day and lower at night. Such loads are described as *inelastic* because they are inflexible or unresponsive to the real-time price. Inelastic loads, also known as ➡️➡️ *non-dispatchable loads*, are modeled by a demand curve that is perfectly vertical and representative of a fixed quantity of power being bought at a given point in time. This lack of flexibility can make the price volatile, ➡️ causing price spikes to occur when demand is high, or when the supply of cheap electricity is intermittent (e.g., wind or solar). Industrial consumers avoid price spikes by becoming ➡️➡️ *dispatchable loads*, consuming only at or below a certain price. Similarly, ➡️ utility companies use demand response programs to curtail EV charging or air conditioning at times when the demand and price would otherwise be excessively high.

On the supply side, there are also ➡️➡️ dispatchable and non-dispatchable generators. We will assume all loads and generators to be dispatchable, as that is the general case and any non-dispatchable resource can be modeled as a dispatchable one.

<!-- ## Bids to Buy and Offers to Sell Power -->

Loads and generators submit ➡️ bids to buy power and offers to sell power, respectively. Each ➡️ bid or offer includes a list of price-quantity pairs. In a given price-quantity pair, the quantity is the ➡️ maximum quantity of power that a generator is willing to sell, or that a load is willing to buy, at the corresponding price in the pair. The price is measured in dollars per MWh, also known as the marginal cost of generating an additional MWh of electricity. The quantity is measured in MW. For an ➡️ offer, the price must monotonically increase as the quantity increases, and for a ➡️ bid, the price must monotonically decrease as the quantity increases.

If these sound similar to supply and demand curves, it's because they are! ➡️ In an electricity market with ➡️ one load and one generator, the ➡️ load's price-quantity pairs would define the electricity market's demand curve and the ➡️ generator's price-quantity pairs would define the market's supply curve, also known as the *dispatch curve*. The ➡️ intersection between the supply and demand curves determines the ➡️ quantity of power, $Q^*$, that will be delivered at the market-clearing price, $P^*$, which ➡️ maximizes welfare. ➡️

<!-- ## Example 1: One Generator, One Load -->

Consider the example shown. The generator says they are willing to produce up to $6 \ \mathrm{MW}$ at $\$2 / \mathrm{MWh}$, or up to $9 \ \mathrm{MW}$ at $\$7 / \mathrm{MWh}$. Note that this does not mean they are willing to produce the first $6 \ \mathrm{MW}$ at $\$2 / \mathrm{MWh}$ and only the remaining $3 \ \mathrm{MW}$ at $\$7 / \mathrm{MWh}$; the generator has one price, and it changes if a certain volume is surpassed, like in the café analogy. The same principle applies on the demand side: the load says they are willing to consume up to $4 \ \mathrm{MW}$ at $\$8 / \mathrm{MWh}$, or up to $8 \ \mathrm{MW}$ at $\$5 / \mathrm{MWh}$. These price-quantity pairs form the two "staircases"&mdash;the supply and demand curves&mdash;shown in the figure. The market clears at $Q^* = 6 \ \mathrm{MW}$ and $P^* = \$5 / \mathrm{MWh}$. ➡️

<!-- ## Example 2: Two Generators, Two Loads -->

What if we have two generators, $\mathrm{G1}$ and $\mathrm{G2}$, and two loads, $\mathrm{L1}$ and $\mathrm{L2}$? Each generator and load has its own ➡️ supply or demand curve formed by its price-quantity pairs, as shown. These are known as ➡️ *individual* supply and demand curves, as they represent individual participants in the market.

In clearing the market, we still want to ➡️ maximize the welfare. The ➡️ total seller cost $C$ is the total of the areas under each generator's individual supply curve, up to the quantity produced by each generator.

And the ➡️ total buyer utility $U$ is the total of the areas under each load's individual demand curve, up to the quantity consumed by each load.

Maximizing the welfare is an optimization problem known as the ➡️➡️ economic dispatch (ED) problem. The problem is ➡️ subject to the constraint that the total quantity sold, $Q_\mathrm{G1} + Q_\mathrm{G2}$, must equal the total quantity bought, $Q_\mathrm{L1} + Q_\mathrm{L2}$. This constraint represents conservation of power flow.

This optimization problem can be simplified by splicing the generators' and loads' individual ➡️➡️ supply and demand curves into an aggregated supply curve and an aggregated demand curve, respectively. The aggregated demand curve can be formed by sorting the price-quantity pairs from high to low, and the aggregated supply curve can be formed by sorting them from low to high (known as *merit order*). The optimization problem can then be solved by finding the ➡️➡️ intersection between the aggregated supply and demand curves.

In the next section, we will see that the optimization cannot always be solved by splicing the generators' and loads' price-quantity pairs into one supply curve and one demand curve. ➡️

<!-- ## The Market Network -->

We have established that for a given market, at a given time, there is ➡️ one market price. However, the electrical grid is complex&mdash;more complex than this, as you can see in the map shown. For the purposes of market modeling, the grid consists of multiple pricing nodes, each of which has its own market price and in that sense acts like a market. Such a setup is called ➡️ *nodal pricing* or *locational marginal pricing (LMP)*.

Sometimes the pricing nodes are organized into larger *zones* for simplicity and one price is set throughout each zone. Such a setup is called *zonal pricing*. ➡️

➡️ Each node is analogous to one neighborhood of cafés. But, of course, the grid is an electrical network, and ➡️ power can be transferred between its nodes through long-distance transmission and distribution lines. This is as if the neighborhoods of cafés were interconnected by an intricate network of pipes! Like electricity, espresso wouldn't even have to be made in the neighborhood in which it is consumed, and ➡️ supply does not need to equal demand within a grid node. Because quantities of power can be ➡️ traded between grid nodes, ➡️ the entire grid must be cleared as one market to maximize the system-wide welfare. ➡️ The total welfare is generally ➡️ higher with trade than without, which is why trade takes place. ➡️

However, the network is leaky. ➡️ Transmission and distribution lines are not ideal wires and have electrical resistance depending on their type and length. ➡️ Thus, some power is lost to heat for each unit of power transferred. ➡️ These transmission losses are analogous to a cost of trade between grid nodes. ➡️ Power transfer between nodes is still usually necessary and beneficial. For example, it is likely be cheaper to use nuclear power transmitted over a great distance, with some lost along the way, than to use power from a nearby gas-fired plant. We need a way to model and account for the costs of trade when clearing the market, as they will affect the optimal quantities of power and ➡️ cause prices to differ between nodes. In general, each node affects all other nodes.

For the sake of ➡️ simplicity when demonstrating the effect of transmission losses on the electricity market, we will assume a given transmission line to have a fixed efficiency, $\eta$, defined as power out divided by power in. ➡️ In the real world, even more complex transmission line models&mdash;which build upon the economic dispatch problem&mdash;are used when clearing the electricity market. ➡️

Losing some power to heat isn't just disadvantageous because it's wasteful. ➡️ As transmission lines ➡️ heat up, they expand, elongate, and sag. If a transmission ➡️ line were to sag too close to a nearby object (such as a tree), electricity will arc to the object and cause a ➡️ short circuit, requiring the line to be immediately ➡️ disconnected from the rest of the grid. ➡️ To avoid this situation, lines are ➡️ rated for a maximum electric current or power based on how quickly they can dissipate heat, just like the wiring in your home. When a line is operating at maximum power, it is said to be ➡️ congested. A congested line limits the amount of electricity that can be traded between grid nodes, requiring electricity to be sourced from other generators that are potentially more expensive, and delivered to other loads that might not be willing to pay as much. Like transmission losses, ➡️ transmission congestion contributes to price differences between grid nodes.

Let's first look at an example of how transmission losses alone affect the market, then add in the effect of transmission congestion. ➡️

<!-- ## Example 3: One Generator Node, One Load Node -->

Recall the previous section's example of ➡️ two generators and two loads. Consider now that the generators $\mathrm{G1}$ and $\mathrm{G2}$ are located at a node ➡️ $\mathrm{A}$, and that the two loads $\mathrm{L1}$ and $\mathrm{L2}$ are located at a node ➡️ $\mathrm{B}$. The two nodes are connected by a ➡️ transmission line with 75% efficiency. This is an unrealistically poor efficiency, for illustrative purposes. The optimization ➡️ problem becomes maximizing $W\!$ subject to the constraint that the ➡️ total quantity bought, $Q_\mathrm{L}$, must equal 75% of the total quantity sold, $Q_\mathrm{G}$, meaning that for every 1 MW generated, only 0.75 MW are delivered to the load, the rest being lost to heat. This is a linear constraint, but would be quadratic if modeling the line's electrical resistance. Of the two quantities $Q_\mathrm{G}$ and $Q_\mathrm{L}$, either can be chosen as the optimization problem's sole decision variable, from which the other quantity can be calculated via the efficiency.

The ➡️➡️ solution to the example at hand is as shown.

The welfare has decreased from $\$47.0 / \mathrm{h}$ in Example 2 to $\$33.\bar{6} / \mathrm{h}$ in this example. The $\$13.\bar{3} / \mathrm{h}$ difference is the cost of having to transfer power between the generator and load nodes via lossy transmission lines. In this example, the producer surplus happened to stay the same ($\$12.0 / \mathrm{h}$) while the consumers' surpluses decreased with the introduction of transmission losses. So, in this example, only the consumers incurred the cost of trade. However, in general, the cost of trade is paid by both producers and consumers. This does not mean that trade is not worthwhile. On the contrary&mdash;in this example, transmission lines allowed the generator and load to find each other, and trade in general provides more optimal buying and selling opportunities for market participants. ➡️

<!-- ## Example 3 with Transmission Congestion -->

➡️➡️ Now assume that the transmission line between nodes $\mathrm{A}$ and $\mathrm{B}$ has an ➡️ $8$-$\mathrm{MW}$ limit, which is lower than the optimal power injection of $Q_\mathrm{G}^* = 9.\bar{3} \ \mathrm{MW}$ that was previously determined for the line. ➡️ With transmission congestion, the ➡️ solution is now $Q_\mathrm{G}^* = 8 \ \mathrm{MW}$, $Q_\mathrm{L}^* = 6 \ \mathrm{MW}$, $P_\mathrm{A}^* = \$4 / \mathrm{MWh}$, and $P_\mathrm{B}^* = \$8 / \mathrm{MWh}$. This is shown in {ref}`fig_2_6b`. The welfare is now $\$31 / \mathrm{h}$, which is $\$2.\bar{6} / \mathrm{h}$ lower than in the non-congested case. Indeed, congested lines generally reduce the system welfare and affect the nodal prices, this example being no exception. In this example, the loads pay $Q_\mathrm{L}^* P_\mathrm{B}^* = \$48 / \mathrm{h}$ but the generators are paid only $Q_\mathrm{G}^* P_\mathrm{A}^* = \$32 / \mathrm{h}$. This difference is known as *congestion rent*, and is collected by the system operator. ➡️

<!-- ## Example 4: One Generator Node, One Combined Generator/Load Node -->

Now consider that only generator $\mathrm{G1}$ is located at node $\mathrm{A}$, while generator $\mathrm{G2}$ and both loads are located at node $\mathrm{B}$. The optimization ➡️ problem becomes maximizing $W\!$ subject to the ➡️ constraint that $0.75 \, Q_\mathrm{G1} + Q_\mathrm{G2} = Q_\mathrm{L}$. Any two of these three quantities can be chosen as the decision variables; we will use $Q_\mathrm{G2}$ and $Q_\mathrm{L}$ arbitrarily.

We can visualize this optimization problem as the ➡️ 3D surface shown. The parallelogram shape of the surface as viewed from above is determined by the above constraint and by the fact that $Q_\mathrm{G2}$ must be between $0$ and $\mathrm{MWh}$.

The ➡️➡️ solution to the example at hand is as shown.

➡️ Thank you for learning about electricity markets with me. Learn more about this and other technical topics on my blog, or by visiting me on LinkedIn.
